= ActiveRecord::MultiConditions

MultiConditions is a simple ActiveRecord plugin for storing ActiveRecord query conditions and make complex queries painless.


== Overview

This plugin doesn't replace ActiveRecord#with_scope method,
nor the basic :condition usage but extends it with the ability
of storing illimitate conditions in multiple step.

  conditions = MultiConditions.new
  # ... do some elaboration
  conditions.append_condition(['active = ? AND query LIKE ?', true, '%foo'])
  # ... other elaboration
  conditions.append_condition(['name = ?', 'aname'])
  
  conditions.to_conditions
  # => "active = true AND query LIKE '%foo' AND name = 'aname'"


== Dependencies

* Ruby 1.8.6
* ActiveRecord 2.0 (or greater)

If you want to run the test suite:

* sqlite3-ruby


== Source

MultiConditions source code is managed via GIT and hosted at GitHub: http://github.com/weppos/activerecord-multiconditions/.


== Download and Installation

Installing ActiveRecord MultiConditions as a GEM is probably the best and easiest way. You must have {RubyGems}[http://rubyforge.org/projects/rubygems/] installed for the following instruction to work:

    $ sudo gem install activerecord-multiconditions

To install the library manually grab the source code from the website, navigate to the root library directory and enter:

    $ sudo ruby setup.rb

If you need the latest development version you can download the source code from the GIT repositories listed above. Beware that the code might not as stable as the official release.


== Usage

First, don't forget to require the library.

    gem 'activerecord-multiconditions'
    require 'multi_conditions'

Now +MultiConditions+ object is automatically available as subclass of any ActiveRecord object.

    class Task < ActiveRecord::Base; end
    
    multiconditions = Task::Multiconditions.new
    # => new instance

=== Create a new instance

As stated by the Important section above, you first need a valid ActiveRecord model
to create a MultiConditions instance.
Because MultiConditions helps you to deal with ActiveRecord queries,
it's easy to understand why you *MUST* establish a valid database connection 
and have at least one table (mapped with a Model) to query.

If you use ActiveRecord from Rails, this is just a matter of creating a new Model.

    # create the Task model
    class Task < ActiveRecord::Base
    end

Now MultiConditions is automatically available within your Task namespace.
You can use it in whatever class method, for example:

    class Task < ActiveRecord::Base
      
      def complex_search()
        c = MultiConditions.new(:foo => 'bar')
        Task.find(:all, c.to_conditions)
      end

    end

But you can also create a new instance from an other library, class or model.
Just remember to initialize MultiConditions from its own namespace.

    class Foo
      class << self
        def my_cool_conditions
          Task::MultiConditions.new(:foo => 1).to_conditions
        end
      end
    end

    Foo.my_cool_conditions
    # => 'foo = 1'

=== Appending conditions

You can append new conditions calling

* #append_condition
* #prepend_condition

and passing the conditions you want to append or prepend.
See Condition Types section to lean more about supported objects.

  conditions = MultiConditions.new
  conditions.append_condition(['active = ? AND query LIKE ?', true, '%foo']
  conditions.prepend_condition(['name = ?', 'aname']
  
  conditions.to_conditions
  # => "name = 'aname' AND active = true AND query LIKE '%foo'"
    

=== Condition types

The MultiConditions object accepts any type of conditions supported by ActiveRecord,
including Strings, Arrays and Hashes, and merges them alltogether
just before sending the final :condition value to ActiveRecord search method.

  conditions = MultiConditions.new
  conditions.append_conditions(:foo => 1, :bar => 2)
  conditions.append_conditions('active = 1')
  conditions.append_conditions(['name LIKE ?', '%foo'])
  
  conditions.to_conditions
  # => 'foo = 1 AND :bar = 2 AND active = 1 AND name LIKE '%foo'
  
See ActiveRecord::Base#find documentation for more conditions examples.



== Important

Once loaded, this library become part of ActiveRecord package and
creates its own namespace at ActiveRecord::Base::MultiConditions.

  require 'multi_conditions'

For various reason, you cannot initialize a new ActiveRecord::Base::MultiConditions
but you *MUST* initialize a MultiConditions instance from a Model.

  # The wrong way
  # raises Message: <"undefined method `abstract_class?' for Object:Class">
  ActiveRecord::Base::MultiConditions.new
  
  # The right way
  class Model < ActiveRecord::Base
  
    def a_method()
      c = MultiConditions.new
      find(:all, :conditions => c.to_conditions)
    end
  
  end


== Author

* {Simone Carletti}[http://www.simonecarletti.com/] <weppos@weppos.net>

If you like this software, please {recommend me}[http://www.workingwithrails.com/person/11967-simone-carletti] at Working with Rails.


== Website and Project Home

* {Project Homepage}[http://code.simonecarletti.com/multiconditions]
* {At GitHub}[http://github.com/weppos/activerecord-multiconditions/]
* {At RubyForge}[http://rubyforge.org/projects/multiconditions/]


== FeedBack and Bug reports

Feel free to email {Simone Carletti}[mailto:weppos@weppos.net] 
with any questions or feedback.

Please submit your bug reports to the Redmine installation for MultiConditions
available at http://code.simonecarletti.com/activerecord-multiconditions.


== Changelog

See CHANGELOG file.
